Image: Cyril Ramaphosa By Andile Mngxitama Whatever your views of the ANC are, like that of the violent bad service taxi industry, the ANC is a black created project. The ANC is an institution created by blacks over 100 years ago. Yes of course in 1955 whites captured its soul with the Freedom Charter. But still it was largely a black project. The National Party lost formal power to the ANC thereby potentially creating danger for white interests. Now the state was in black hands and the ANC could potentially turn against white interests and use its hegemonic hold over the state to go for a black agenda. Jacob Zuma blackened the ANC, a real nightmare for white power. He spoke about black unity to return the land as part of his Radical Economic Transformation policy direction. Here the ANC would have turned its back against its white soul to reclaim its blackness. This threat is real given the amount of black support for the ANC electorally. The whites concocted a plan to counter this dangerous development. They used R1 billion to buy the ANC thereby nullifying its turn to blackness. Ramaphosa handed the black organisation to whites to continue the Stellenbosch crafted white agenda. There is also a secondary strategy. The ANC must be weakend to a point where its potential to serve the black agenda is destroyed. An ANC that gets less than 50% is good for the consolidation of white power. We can see already how parties such as the EFF are helping to put whites in power in critical local municipalities. This is the path to a white president of the Democratic Alliance. So the real mandate of Ramaphosa is to use the ANC to push the white agenda whilst weakening it as a potential weapon for black power. Whites have indeed captured the ANC, just like they have taken the land. This turn is Zuma’s dilemma. He knows surrendering the ANC to whites is a serious danger to blacks. But as things stand the ANC is a white party essentially. Whites took the land and the ANC. Andile Mngxitama is the President of Black First Land First (BLF) a radical black consciousness organization. When using any of Black Opinion’s content, partly or in full, kindly always provide an active hyperlink to the original material.