By Andile Mngxitama The emergence of Operation Dudula has to be understood “structurally”. It is a by-product of a deepening crisis of racial monopoly capital on the one hand and on the other hand the absence of a proper Left or anti capitalist movement. Deep crisis of capitalism produces two social and political responses. It’s either a radical revolutionary movement emerges, or a right wing movement emerges. Hitler was a right wing response to the German crisis. An easy solution was fpund – the Jew! A left response emerged in Russia in 1917. That crisis of capital had given rise to the First World War. The Bolshevics turned the crisis into a revolutionary crisis and made a revolution that toppled the feudal Tsarist regime. In Germany the capitalist crisis created an Adolf Hitler – a right wing development. In Russia the imperialist crisis threw up Vladmir Lenin. Whether the capitalist crisis throws up reaction or revolution depends on the subjective factors such as whether there is a nascent revolutionary or reactionary movement which responds to the crisis. In contemporary South Africa we have gone through 28 years of neo liberal capitalist crisis which has impacted negatively on the black working class and the poor. Add to this the neoliberal crisis of the SADEC region – a toxic mix of depressed wages and competition for social goods is intensified as the poor of the region flock to SA. It’s the poor of SA that shares the burden of the influx of the immigrant seeking greener pastures. White monopoly capital precipitates the social dislocation of the South African poor by intensifying competition at the job market between the indigenous worker and the migrant. The migrant worker is most likely to accept a lower wage under harsh working conditions which the local worker is not willing to take. Competition intensifies including for social amenities. Also the migrant finding that life is not easy gets involved in petit commodity activities including criminal acts such as infrustructure looting to feed white monopoly capital with such products as steel, copper, gold and diamonds from informal mining and the stripping of infrustracture. The appetite for these goods by white capital is huge and since there are no labour cost, margins of profits are enormous. Couple the competition between the local poor and the outsider poor in a crisis created by capital, you have the easy right wing solution of creating animosity amongst the exploited classes. A right wing simplistic but compelling ideology that puts all the blame on the immigrant emerges often encouraged by the biggest beneficiaries and creators of the crisis in the first instance. Against the easy ‘hate the immigrant’ right wing solution we need to develop a revolutionary left response which will provide a real solution to the crisis. The right wing creates the impression that it can get rid of the immigrant. It’s a lie that even Donald Trump couldn’t hide. In the time of crisis we must insist on thinking. Andile Mngxitama is the President of Black First Land First (BLF), a radical black consciousness organization. When using any of Black Opinion’s content, partly or in full, kindly always provide an active hyperlink to the original material.