Image: Kuli Roberts By Andile Mngxitama Kuli Roberts was an epoch defining figure in the mould of Brenda Fassie and Jabu Pule. She was an outsider even when she was inside the milieu of the South African celebrity scene. She held tight on her ideas and paid dearly for them. This larger than life character lost her column in one of the national papers for pointing out the fraught relations between the African and Indian communities. Basically she was pointing out the virulent anti-black sentiment that is deep-seated in the Indian community. If only she was listened to instead of being vilified, perhaps the tragic events such as the recent Phoenix massacre could have been avoided. The expanse of Robert’s concerns were clearly articulated on the MacG show. When she was asked “what you wanna be remembered as?” she responded in what can be called the Kuli Manifesto. She said, “I don’t want to be remembered, I want you guys to just look after each other, I want you to look after the people who are downtrodden on, and are still downtrodden on, I want you to look after people with albinism, I need you to look after the LGBTI community, I need for you to look after black people, I need you to stop insulting black people and insulting them saying they can’t swim, because remember that we were the ones saving the sailors when they were settling on this continent, so I need you to please umtuomnyama beke apha, love yourselves and Ubuntu, and also this whole thing of money and materialism and standing on cars while abantu behlala emacocombeni, nobody is impressed, you might think they are but they not, so Ubuntu is the most important”. Breaking down the Kuli Manifesto gives us a clear sense of her ethical commitment to the totality of black liberation. In that statement she made us realize the importance of shining the light on the most marginalized communitities, the LGBTQI community and people living with albinism within the rubric of the larger black community, which is her focus. She clearly stands on a decolonizing ticket by putting a focus on the sailors who were saved by black people when they first arrived here and then betrayed our goodwill by stealing the land and enslaving us up to this day. She was clear about putting black people first as an act of Ubuntu. By this she rescues Ubuntu from the liberal notions that denuded the concept of its revolutionary potency. What the Kuli Manifesto also does is put a spotlight on the crass materialism of politicians and celebrities. She decries the practice of showing off whilst the people live in shacks. Fanon similarly decried these acts of conspicuous consumption by the post-colonial elite. It’s a disease of failed decolonization processes that gives rise to the slavery of Gucci and Louis Vuitton. There is something profound in her lack of ego. She says she doesn’t want to be remembered. She then puts emphasis on how the living should live an ethical existence of caring for each other by focusing on the oppressed. This is a revolutionary ethic, that places the wellbeing of others before once’s own interests. “I don’t want to be remembered”, what a profound statement. The human ego worries about its perpetuity. Here we are confronted with a complete and evolved human being who has been able to overcome the debilitating problems of the ego. Kuli was a pathfinder and a norm breaker. She was loud and audacious. In a sense we can say she exuded the same spirit of personal freedom as displayed by Brenda Fassie, she who broke all convention to announce her presence. This same spirit of transgression is displayed in Jabu Pule. These super gifted individuals carry their era on their shoulders in all its deformities. We may even say they led tragic lives because they lived in a tragic era. We learn more about our era by studying individuals like these who simply go against the grain and generally pay dearly for staking their claim to call their souls their own. Kuli Roberts gave color to our dour existence and left a big hole upon the social scene. We do well to remember her by loving ourselves and putting blacks first. The best tribute we can pay her is by making sure the downtrodden get liberation. That would be a befitting tribute to a deva of the revolution! Andile Mngxitama is the President of Black First Land First (BLF), a radical black consciousness organization. When using any of Black Opinion’s content, partly or in full, kindly always provide an active hyperlink to the original material.