Image: Twitter, Sphithiphithi Evaluator, @_AfricanSoil By Andile Mngxitama The biggest revolutionary point in recent times in RSA was when President Zuma and apparently the Guptas had put the focus on the primary contradiction which is white monopoly capital. The fight was revolutionary, giving life to the policy directive of Radical Economic Transformation (RET). President Zuma had appointed an army of RET warriors like Hlaudi Motsoeneng, Dudu Myeni, Brian Matshela Koko, amongst others. In the judiciary we had Mogoeng Mogoeng and John Hlophe, and we had a progressive Public Protector in Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane. President Zuma even fired Pravin Gordhan. That act sent chills down the spines of Stellenbosch and London. Lord Robin Renwick responded from London. The EFF was primed and couched at the secret meeting at Chatham House sponsored by Rob Hersov. The notion of “state capture” was born in London and the Guptas were branded colonialists. The endgame was the removal of Zuma and the Guptas. There is evidence that the Guptas provided both financial and intellectual guidence to the RET battle. ANN7 was the ideological point of the war. The Guptas knew if they want to enter the SA economy they can only do so under a policy framework that puts blacks first. See the Mining Charter, it’s said to be influenced by the Guptas. So politically we had President Zuma leading the battle with the financial, logistical and intellectual support of the Guptas. The Guptas knew they can only succeed if blacks in general succeed. London and Stellenbosch understood the danger they were in hence the ‘Zuma must go’ campaign and demonisation of the Guptas. Objectively, the Guptas represented a patriotic bourgeoisie whose fortunes depended on the deepening of transformation. The Zuma fight with capital represents one of the biggest moments towards real change in recent history. We lost the battle but the war continues. The enemy has the upper hand. Currently the enemy controls both government and the opposition. Stellenbosch and London have hegemony. We shall remember Zuma as the leader who took the fight to the real enemy. Siyabonga Msholozi!Aluta continua… Andile Mngxitama is the President of Black First Land First (BLF), a radical black consciousness organization. When using any of Black Opinion’s content, partly or in full, kindly always provide an active hyperlink to the original material.